Here we report, for the first time, that the pupillary light response (PLR) reflects the focus of exogenous (reflexive) shifts of attention. When attention was drawn to a bright surface, the pupil initially constricted, relative to when attention was drawn to a dark surface. This shows that the PLR is driven specifically by the brightness of attended stimuli, and is not a simple reflex to retinal illumination [in line with @Binda2013JNeurosci;@Math么t2013Plos;@Naber2013Osc;@Math么t2014EyePrep]. Crucially, this effect reversed after about one second, at which point the pupil dilated when attention had been drawn to a bright, relative to a dark surface. This is analogous to the behavioral phenomenon of inhibition of return (IOR), the inhibitory phase that typically follows exogenous shifts of attention [@Posner1984]. Individual differences revealed a strong correlation between pupillary inhibition and behavioral IOR: Participants who showed pupillary inhibition also showed behavioral IOR, and vice versa.

The present results show that the PLR is linked to visuospatial attention, and also provide a hint as to how this link may arise. We conjecture that the PLR is modulated by activity in the superior colliculus (SC), a mid-brain area that is known for its role in attention and eye movements [@AwhArmstrongMoore2006]. Although the SC is not traditionally considered part of the PLR pathway, @WangBoehnke2012 recently showed that microstimulation to intermediate layers of the monkey SC (SCi) triggered pupillary dilation. This dilation largely reflected an orienting response (i.e. not luminance-related and thus distinct from the PLR), but one aspect of their results suggested involvement of the PLR as well: Dilation was more pronounced when monkeys viewed dark, as compared to bright displays. One interpretation of this result is that microstimulation induced a covert shift of attention to some (unspecified) region on the display [@AwhArmstrongMoore2006]. Analogous to the present results, this may have triggered a pupillary constriction when the attended region was bright, relative to when it was dark.

A link between the PLR and the SCi is also supported by the fact that neurons in this area exhibit the same bi-phasic pattern of facilitation and inhibition that is observed in behavior, and that we have demonstrated here using pupillometry [@FecteauMunoz2005]. Neurons in the nearby superficial layers of the SC (SCs) neither show this bi-phasic response [@FecteauMunoz2005], nor trigger a pupillary dilation when stimulated [@WangBoehnke2012]. In other words, there appears to be a highly specific link between the PLR and SCi activity. This link may play a crucial role in modulation of the PLR by factors such as endogenous attention, mental imagery, and illusory brightness [@Math么t2013Plos;@Binda2013JNeurosci;@Naber2013Osc;@Math么t2014EyePrep;@Naber2013Image;@Binda2013Sun;@Laeng2012Illusions;@LaengSulutvedt2014Imaginary].

In summary, we have shown that, after an exogenous shift of attention, the pupillary light response (PLR) exhibits the same bi-phasic pattern of facilitation followed by inhibition that is observed in behavior and neural activity. This illustrates that the PLR is not merely a low-level reflex to light, but is a complex eye movement that reflects how we selectively parse and interpret visual input.
