The pupillary light response (PLR) is a well-known physiological response that is described in most neuroanatomy textbooks. What is less well known is that the PLR is not purely reflexive, as is often assumed, but is modulated by cognitive factors. For example, we and others have recently shown that the pupil constricts when you covertly (i.e. without looking at) attend to a bright stimulus, as compared to a dark stimulus [@Mathôt2013Plos;@Binda2013JNeurosci;@Naber2013Osc;@Mathôt2014JExpPsy]. Moreover, stimuli that subjectively appear very bright trigger a constriction, relative to equiluminant stimuli that appear less bright [e.g., pictures of the sun vs. indoor scenes; @Binda2013Sun;@Naber2013Image]+[; see also @Laeng2012Illusions]. Together, these and related findings show that the PLR is not merely a reflexive response to the amount of light that falls on the retina, but is modulated by the way in which we process and interpret visual input.

To date, studies that have investigated the link between visual attention and the PLR have focused on enhancement of the PLR by endogenous (voluntary) shifts of attention [@Mathôt2013Plos;@Binda2013JNeurosci;@Naber2013Osc]. It has not yet been investigated whether the PLR is similarly modulated by exogenous (reflexive) shifts of attention, such as elicited by suddenly appearing stimuli. Exogenous attention provides a particularly interesting case, because [unlike endogenous attention, @Chica2010] it is characterized by a bi-phasic response: For a brief moment after attention is exogenously drawn to a cued location, detection and discrimination improve for stimuli presented at that location. This initial facilitation is followed by a period of inhibition (of return, IOR), during which detection and discrimination are impaired for the previously attended location [@Posner1984]. Plausibly, IOR improves the efficiency of visual search by temporarily marking locations that have received attention and do not need to be visited again [e.g., @Klein1988]. ++It is currently unknown whether behavioral IOR is accompanied by a reduced light response to inhibited locations. If so, this would be strong support for the view that the PLR is an integral part of attentional selection and inhibition.++

In the present study we investigated whether the PLR is modulated by exogenous shifts of attention, using a variation of the Posner-cuing task. Participants continuously fixated the center of a display that was divided into a bright and a dark half. A brief motion stimulus attracted attention to the bright or dark side. We predicted that the pupil would initially constrict when attention was drawn to the bright side, relative to the dark side, reflecting attentional facilitation. We further predicted that this pattern would reverse at longer intervals after the motion stimulus, reflecting IOR.
